There is another alternative syntax which I want to show you that's related to how you listen to changes.
Thus far, we always use provider of and
to be honest, that's the most common way of doing it but there is another way which is totally equal which
you could also use.
You could also wrap the parts of your widget tree that are interested in an update into a new widget
and that widget would be the consumer widget.
Now for consumer to be available, you need to import your provider package because that is provided
by the provider package and consumer then actually does not take just a child but actually a builder
and you have to provide a builder.
Now that builder takes a context, then something dynamic and then a widget. Now what's that?
Now first of all, you have to know that consumer is a generic type
and of course you should provide or mention which type of data you want to consume
and then this is pretty equal to provider of.
So this establishes the connection to your provided data and it looks for the nearest provider of that
type up in the widget tree.
This builder then receives a context, it receives an instance or the nearest instance it found of
that data, so our product here
and then it receives a child.
Now let's worry about the child a second, let's first of all focus on what it should return
and there, it should of course return what you returned before.
So here, I'll cut all of that, get rid of this child here for the moment and simply return in the builder
this widget tree which depends on our provided data.
So now we can comment out this provider of thing up there and we're setting up a listener here with
consumer.
If you do a full refresh now, you'll see I can still click these hearts and have the same behavior as
before.
Now why would we use this approach then?
Well generally, it's exactly the same,
so it's up to you but it can have a couple of advantages depending on how you use it.
When you use provider of, then the whole build method will rerun whenever that data changes.
Now with clever widget splitting, you can split your widgets such that this isn't a problem because you
want to run the entire build method when something changes
but you could always have a case where you only want to run a subpart of your widgets tree when some
data changes and then you could only wrap the subpart of the widget tree
that depends on your product data with that listener.
That would be an option
and even here for example, you could get your product here with listen: false, to get all that one time data
which you don't expect to change, like the title or the imageUrl and you could then use consumer,
not up here but down there around your favorite button to wrap only that with that consumer because
that's the only place in this widget which really does change when our product changes.
So just to demonstrate this, we could get our product here with listen: false and then we use consumer
product here, cut this, here still return ClipRRect and only wrap our leading icon button here with
this consumer.
Now of course, make sure you manage your parentheses correctly, remove one at the end and wrap the icon
button in one more
and now what I achieved here is I have that general product which I'm extracting from my provided, from
my provided product but I don't listen to updates there.
I need that general product because I'm getting the ID from there,
the imageUrl and the title but then I have this part of my widget tree down there which actually
also listens to my nearest product but here, I am interested in changes and consumer always listens to
changes here and I then rebuild the icon button whenever my product changes. So I shrink the area of
the widget which reruns when my product changes and to prove that,
let me throw a little print statement in here.
Product rebuilds and we should see that this now doesn't run when my heart here is clicked. So it runs initially
here and now if I clear that and I press the heart,
you see it doesn't run and that would change if I don't set this here to false of course, if I, just to prove
this, do this real quick,
now if I press the heart, you of course see product rebuilds there as well.
So that's a tiny improvement
we can actually implement here because consumer allows us to,
since it's a widget, throw it somewhere into our widget tree and then only rebuild the nested children
since this here is not a widget but simply a method or a way of extracting data and storing it in a
variable,
it always triggers the whole build method.
Again you could achieve something similar to having a consumer down there by splitting your widgets
in a efficient way,
for example we could have outsourced the icon button here into a separate widget, then used provider
of in there with listen to true or not defined at all since true is the default and we would have a
similar setup but this here is another way where you can easily control a part of your widget tree and
make it a listener whereas the majority of the tree is not a listener.
Now what's up with that child you're getting here as a third argument? If you have parts in your widget
tree, which then does update, which you don't actually want to rebuild when it generally rebuilds this,
then on the consumer as an argument, you can pass in a child and that could be some data, like a text
widget which never changes, which doesn't depend on the data you're generally listening to.
And this child you're defining here which can also be a more complex widget tree or a custom widget
of course is then ending up here in this child argument which is passed into this builder function
and you can then reference it in there.
Now here, I don't need it because all my parts here in the end are dynamic but if you had something else
here, like a label which the IconButton doesn't have
but if it would have a label and that should be your text widget there which shouldn't rebuild just
because product changed, then you could refer to your child argument here and this child argument up
there would refer to the value you stored here and it wouldn't rebuild when your consumer generally
does rebuild its builder widget here or its builder function. So it can be a tiny optimization if in
this part which generally should update, you still have parts that shouldn't update.
It's a bit more advanced, we don't need it here, hence I'll add an underscore. The core takeaway here really
is that consumers can be used to only rebuild parts of the widget tree instead of the entire widget
tree. Again, something you could have also achieved with clever widget splitting and only provider of
but it's up to you what you use and there generally is no better or worse option.